What is Design?
Steve Jobs has made an interesting observation,
a famous quote, about What Design Actually
Is.
It is not how it looks, it is not how it feels,
it is how it works.
iPod.. 2001..
An amazing music-playing device.
But, in 2006, something sturdier, something
larger in memory capacity, something with
supposedly better software, from a larger
company, popular in many other domains, Microsoft,
they launched a product called Zune.
Why didn’t it become famous?
Why didn’t you hear about the Zune as often
as you heard about the iPod?
There is an answer to this question..
Let us see..!
Namaste!
Four Fifty Four is about lessons from a speed
boat.
If you are wondering what a speed boat can
after all teach us, well, I’m in the same
boat.
I don’t know, but let’s get started on
the ride!
Firstly, I want to clarify what is the reason
why the iPod was much more famous and popular
than the Zune.
I read an article recently, and they have
described the reason.
Very simple, very plain..
It seems the iPod started appearing in the
hands of some early adopters.
The moment they saw such a device, and realised
that it has been released by Apple, that they
are able to listen to high quality music,
… some people started buying it, but you
know what happened?
The most important thing that happened was
others saw this shiny device on these people’s
hands and wanted to borrow it for a few moments
just to have a look around, and they were
able to intuitively, immediately, naturally
understand how to use it without any guidance
or help.
That single magical thing.
That is the reason why the iPod was so famous,
because the moment he returned the borrowed
iPod, he made a beeline to the store, to buy
one for himself.
Because it just worked!
The Zune..
There were some early adopters and Microsoft
fans who bought it.
I remember one myself and I’m hoping he’s
watching it, but.. he brought it to office
one day and shoved it into my hand.
“Check this out.
See how beautiful.
See what an amazing new ‘Metro’ user experience
design.
Place it in your ear, and you will be taken
directly to heaven!”. he said.
And, that is how the experience was too!
But.. those intuitive..
immediate.. glowing of that bulb.
I get it..
I don’t need to ask “Hey, how to go back
in this”..
That matter?
That passerby understanding how it works..
That didn’t happen and hence, there were
fewer people who went to the shop to buy one
more and hence it wasn’t as famous.
Design is how it works, specifically how some
very important, very few, but very important
features, how they work.
Some of you may have watched this advertisement.
“Sir, may I present you the super luxury
yacht..
The Nefertiti.
Apart from all the luxuries, it has six luxury
suites, three kitchens, a mini golf course,
a 3D theater, two ballrooms, and to top it
all, it has a top speed of 25 knots . Kitna
deti hai??!!”
So in Hindi, the question asked here is, “All
that is okay, thank you, but…
How many kilometers to the gallon or how many
kilometers per liter?”
This man is practical minded.
It is an ad for a Maruti Suzuki car..
“All that is okay, but please come to the
matter.
The most important matter.
Kitna Deti Hai!”
I don’t know this man.
Probably you may not too, but this man and
his friend there, they were credited on the
internet for the birth of a very beautiful,
very important phrase.
A question..
“All that is okay, thank you, but .. does
it float?
What does it mean?
“Well, you are telling me about a lot of
things, okay, thanks, but this has to float.
That is the most important reason for its
existence.
Does it float?
Even though it sounds like a joke…
This wasn’t a joke.
More than 1000.. 1200 people died when the
Titanic sank.
The Titanic must have had 64 life boats, but
it made that maiden voyage with just 20 boats.
When you look up the documentation, refer
to history, and look up the logs, two reasons
were quoted as to why there were only 20 boats.
The deck would look too cluttered with all
those boats in the boat — was cited as one
reason..
And, the other reason, if all these boats
were placed around the edge, the periphery
of the Titanic, but if that is done like that,
the first class passengers looking through
portholes from their cabins under deck won’t
have an uninterrupted, unobstructed view.
The edges of boats will be visible.
It will look ungainly.
So, let us jettison some lifeboats..
But.. does it float?
All that is okay, but does it float?!
Very important question.
Went unanswered, nay.. even worse.. went unasked,
and that led to this, this debacle of the
century.
A book by this name.. Will it make the boat
go faster?
An Olympian, An Olympian gold medalist, Britisher..
A rowboat featuring eight rowers.
A speed boat.
A row boat.
World Champions at the Sydney Olympics.
But, before that grand moment at the Sydney
Olympics.. in ‘98, they get thrashed.
They come eighth in a group of eight.
And, then it happens.
They all get together, they band together
and they decide we need to make a mark and
we are going to train..
How did they train?
And, were there lessons that were even applicable
in today’s corporate world..?
That is what the book talks about.
The title of the book, the most important
lesson in the book is “Will It Make The
Boat Go Faster”.
Ben Hunt Davis is the author and the winner..
And, you see him kissing the Gold Medal here.
If you attend his program, at one crucial
moment, he hands that gold medal over and
says, “Pass it around in the audience.
This is what I fought for.
Feel it?
This is what success feels like.
Get a sense of it”.
What sort of question is this?
Will it make the boat go faster?
Well, he says, “All through the training,
we had only one question burned into our minds.
We kept repeatedly asking that question..
Again and again.
If ever we got stuck in a dilemma, we asked
that question to ourselves and the answer
presented itself, the dilemma ran away.
Example?
This training, they are asking us to do it
in this river…
waking up at this unearthly hour in the morning..
Should I be sleeping now or should I train
in this river?
“Hey, wait, will it make the boat go faster?”..
“Of course, yes.”
“Then it’s okay.
I’ll wake up early in the morning.
I’ll come for the training.
Snake bite.
Seems that is what this drink is called.
They go to Thailand for training, and some
waiter accosts them with this unique drink.
Snake bite.
“You have never tasted anything like this
before.”
says he.
They pause and they ask that question, “Will
it make the boat go faster?”
“Of course not.”
“Don’t touch it then”.
A new trainer has come and he wants to measure
the volume of vital capacity that oxygen containing
ability while you are exercising.
It’s a bit of a pain.
“Who is this new guy who has come?
Why should I trust him?”
But wait, “Will it make the boat go faster?”
“Yes.”
“Let’s do it!”
Three eggs or four for breakfast?
Will I take four eggs and make the boat go
faster or will I put on weight?
Look at that very simple question that cuts
away the complexity and presents the answer
to you in an empty plate.
“Here, take it”.
In the world of software engineering, they
even call it Test Driven Development.
If you want to build a complex piece of software,
.. well, no problem..
Just don’t start coding immediately.
Take a very very simple boilerplate piece
of code.
Minimal code..
It won’t work.
But, write it.
Try it out.
It will spit out an error, surely..
yes?
Now, fix that bug.
Now fix the next one.
Keep doing that, until you get the expected
output.
Test Driven Development.
I remember seeing a cartoon too, about it.
“I am trying to understand TDD.”
“That’s easy.
First you make a test that fails.
Then, you do the least amount of work possible
to make it pass.”
And, the first person asks again..
“So, if I’m going to build a bridge..?”
And the wise guy comes back with, “Step
one would be drive your car over a cliff.
Here, take the keys!”
For, that is the first test!
A gap between two cliffs.
You need to go from here to there..
And, while building it.. while beginning to
build it, .. You need to test before building,
yes?
So, drive your car off the cliff first!
Jokes apart, test-driven development is a
methodology where you minimize the amount
of untested out-in-the-blue work that you
do.. you ask yourself a very simple question
again and again.
“Does it float?”
“Will it make the boat go faster?”
We have encountered this book earlier..
Ken Kocienda..
Creative Selection..
He is the kingpin who brought the autocorrect
on the Apple smartphones!
Not just that..
He had another huge contribution to iOS, the
mobile platform from Apple, and that contribution
was building safari for the mobile..
Safari is the browser application.
Safari, before it was built for the mobile,
it was first built for the computer.
And, when that was happening, the world already
had Internet Explorer.
All over the world, there was this Windows
operating system and Windows came pre-installed
with Internet Explorer.
Why would anybody want another browser.. was
the thought process at that time.
At that time, Steve Jobs encouraged his employees
with, “We have an Operating System.
We don’t have a browser.
We need to get a browser and it needs to work
blazingly fast.”
That was the question they internalised.
They devised something called the PLT.
The page load test.
Remember TDD?
Test-driven development?
They created the test.
It’ll only evaluate one quality..
Speed of loading..
Look at their first test result here.
www.yahoo.com is the target.
And, It just loads a black rectangle.
Just load the damn thing, check for the time.
Can we do it faster than other browsers?
That was the challenge.
The aim was not to load www.yahoo.com.
The aim was to make it faster to load a black
rectangle.
Then get whatever is in yahoo.com.., no need
to render it.
Just get it and check the loading time..
And then render it.
Don’t bother about organization..
And then that is how they tested it and eventually
when Safari was ready, not only was it an
amazing browser, it was the fastest browser
of its time.
Maniacal Focus on one single question.
Every time they reached a particular point
and it looked so good, but it failed the plt,
it was slower than or not faster enough than
the other browsers..??
They failed it.
No need.
They will sacrifice the beauty.
Speed is of the essence.
Single-minded focus.
Does it float?
Will it make the boat go faster?
This guy has quite a similar story.
Vince Lombardi is his name.
The greatest coach of all time, they say,
in American Football.
He has written an autobiographical book called
“The science and art of football”.
Before he became a coach for a specific team,
that team had suffered 10 straight knockouts
from the league.
10 straight knockouts.
The 11th time they lift the champions cup.
Back to basics is what they claim he said.
“We will focus on one thing” he said..
Ring a bell, folks?
He said, “We will chase perfection.
Of course we won’t reach it, of course we
won’t be able to touch it, but along the
way we will reach excellence”, he is supposed
to have said.
Chase perfection.
Everything that you do..
One thing..
Focus on that alone.
Master it.
Chase perfection, achieve excellence.
That was his strategy.
As a closing thought, I wanted to share this
viral video..
Watch it first..
Somewhere in Erode.. at a Wedding Hall..
“Next Level Marriage Meals”!!
I wondered instead of doing all that, what
if they had invited a gifted chef!
They may have experimented with a multi-cultural,
multi-cusine menu..
They could have donated this money for some
charity..!
How does it add value?
We could ask all those old questions again.
Does it float?
Will it make the boat go faster?
How does it help make a meal memorable?
In fact, if I look at that golden peacock
standing overbearingly beside me.., I’ll
be psyched out.
I wouldn’t want to eat.
I am reminded of that movie called UP.
This is what comes to mind.
That little scout-boy munching chocolate,
and when he is not looking, this happens.
I’d be wondering if this bird is going to
peck at my food or perhaps even peck on my
head.
Anyway, thank you.
Hope you make your boat go faster.
We will meet soon!
Thank you.